Learning Objectives

By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

    Explain what a vector database is and why it’s needed for embedding storage
    Install ChromaDB and create a collection for storing document embeddings
    Add documents with embeddings and metadata to a ChromaDB collection
    Query ChromaDB to retrieve the most semantically similar documents

So far, you’ve been storing embeddings in Python lists and NumPy arrays. That works fine for 10 or 50 documents. But what happens when you have 10,000 documents? Or 100,000?

Storing 100,000 embeddings (each with 384 dimensions) in a Python list means keeping ~150 million numbers in memory. Searching through them means comparing your query to every single one - a linear scan that gets slower as your collection grows. And if your script crashes, everything is gone.

You need a vector database - a database designed specifically for storing and searching embedding vectors efficiently. It’s like the jump from keeping data in Python dictionaries (Module 2) to using SQLAlchemy and a real database (Module 3). Same upgrade, same reasons: persistence, performance, and scale.
What is ChromaDB?

ChromaDB is an open-source vector database designed for AI applications. It’s the vector equivalent of SQLite - lightweight, runs locally, no server setup required, and perfect for learning and prototyping.

ChromaDB stores your documents alongside their embeddings and optional metadata. When you query it, ChromaDB uses optimized algorithms to find the most similar vectors without scanning every single one (this is called approximate nearest neighbor search).

Think of it this way:

    SQLite stores rows and columns, lets you query with SQL: SELECT * FROM users WHERE age > 25
    ChromaDB stores text and embeddings, lets you query by meaning: "Find the 5 documents most similar to this question"

ChromaDB Core Concepts

Collection: A group of documents - like a table in a relational database. You might have one collection for "course notes" and another for "product documentation."

Document: A text string stored in the collection. This is your chunk of text.

Embedding: The vector representation of the document. ChromaDB can generate these automatically or accept pre-computed ones.

ID: A unique identifier for each document (you provide this).

Metadata: Optional key-value pairs attached to each document (source file, category, date, etc.). You can filter queries by metadata.
Installation
pip install chromadb

That’s it. No server to configure, no Docker container to run. ChromaDB starts as an in-memory database by default, with options to persist to disk.
The Basic Workflow

Every ChromaDB interaction follows this pattern:
1. Create (or get) a collection
2. Add documents with IDs, text, and optional metadata
3. Query with a text string or embedding
4. Get back the most similar documents with scores


Gemini_Generated_Image_z5em93z5em93z5em (1).png


ChromaDB’s Built-In Embedding

A powerful feature: ChromaDB can embed your text automatically. You don’t have to pre-compute embeddings with sentence-transformers. When you add documents as strings, ChromaDB uses its default embedding function to convert them.

This is convenient for getting started, but for production apps you’ll often want to control the embedding model yourself (for consistency, version control, and quality).
Persistence: Keeping Data Between Runs

By default, ChromaDB stores everything in memory. When your script ends, the data is gone. To persist data between runs:
import chromadb

# Persistent client — data saved to ./chroma_data/ directory
client = chromadb.PersistentClient(path="./chroma_data")

The persistent client saves to disk automatically. When you restart your script, the data is still there.
Where ChromaDB Fits in Your Stack

ChromaDB is the storage layer for your search system:

    Module 5 (FastAPI): Your API accepts search queries from clients
    Module 6 (Streamlit): Your UI provides the search interface
    Module 7 (this): ChromaDB stores and retrieves the relevant documents
    Module 8 (RAG): Retrieved documents feed into an LLM for answer generation

In the next lesson, you’ll combine everything - chunking, embeddings, and ChromaDB - into a complete semantic search tool. ChromaDB is the engine that makes it scale.